Watching Together: Integrating Text Chat with Video
ABSTRACT
Watching video online is becoming increasingly popular,
and new video streaming technologies have the potential to
transform video watching from a passive, isolating
experience into an active, socially engaging experience.
However, the viability of an active social experience is
unclear: both chatting and watching video require attention,
and may interfere with one another and detract from the
experience. In this paper, we empirically examine the
activity of chatting while watching video online. We
examine how groups of friends and strangers interact, and
find that chat has a positive influence on social
relationships, and people chat despite being distracted. We
discuss the benefits and opportunities provided by mixing
chat and video, uncover some of the attentional and social
challenges inherent in this combination of media, and
provide guidance for structuring the viewing experience.
Author Keywords
Video, interactive television, social TV, chat, strangers,
friends.
ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces – synchronous
interaction.
INTRODUCTION
Watching video online is becoming an extremely popular
activity. Google Video and YouTube allow people to watch
hundreds of thousands of user-contributed videos, as well
as rate them and leave comments. Some video content is
even being produced specifically for the Internet [12], and
recently, traditional media companies such as ABC and
CBS have been experimenting with streaming television
shows online (e.g. http://abc.go.com/fes). Movies are
moving online as well, with Lycos Cinema allowing users
to watch movies and chat with other users in their screening
rooms (http://cinema.lycos.com). Finally, new media
companies such as ManiaTV.com produce television solely
for the Internet, coupled with real-time chat.
However, despite the growing popularity of online video,
and especially video-centered interactions, to our
knowledge there is no research that examines how people
experience video broadcasts with real-time chat.
Conversation is one of life’s most enjoyable experiences,
but it also consumes considerable attentional resources.
Anyone who has attempted to watch a movie while others
are talking knows of the effort in, and distraction that
results from, trying to listen to the dialogue, follow the
story line, and listen to (or fend off) the chatter of others.
In this paper, we report our studies of people’s experience
of watching videos online, while simultaneously chatting
with others using a text chat feature. We asked if user
experience and relationships would be enhanced or harmed
by this activity. If interactions are interwoven with
watching video, will viewers be able to submerge
themselves in the video? Will social interaction be fun
because of the shared viewing experience, or will it just be
annoying? How might the video experience be structured to
leverage both watching and chatting?
We find these questions important to HCI for several
reasons. First, HCI has a history of interest in the human
capacity for processing parallel streams of information, and
in understanding the effects of interruption on computer use
experiences (e.g. [7]). Second, the effect of shared video
watching on relationships has direct implications on the
potential to use this computer-mediated communications
tool to build social capital [19]. Finally, the nature of our
study yields design implications for those who have already
deployed chat with video systems.
We conducted two studies to investigate watching and
chatting. The first was an exploratory study designed to
answer some preliminary questions about live video and
chat. Would people chat during a movie? Do they enjoy the
experience, or find it too distracting? From this study, we
learned that people do chat, and chat is distracting while
watching a movie. Our second study evaluated two methods
of reducing distraction: inserting intermissions in between
video content, or reserving a period for discussion after the
video. This study also examined the social experience of
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
CHI 2007, April 28–May 3, 2007, San Jose, California, USA.
Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-593-9/07/0004...$5.00.
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
877
watching together: how are people's relationships affected,
is this an activity that promotes conversation among
strangers, and how does conversation affect evaluations of
the video itself? We found that chat had a positive influence
on the relationships of friends and strangers, the presence of
the media was a large influence on conversations, and
intermissions did reduce feelings of distraction without
affecting the amount of chat that occurred.
VIDEO AND INTERNET TELEVISION
Live streaming video online extends the reach of
conventional television broadcasting, by enabling people
who are not co-located to participate in a shared viewing
experience. For instance, members of an online political
group could watch their candidate as part of a community
event, and discuss the event on community forums. Friends
separated by distance can chat and “hang out” online while
watching their favorite shows together. Families can use
streaming video to keep in touch with one another, sharing
important events such as birthday parties and weddings.
Real-time communication may enhance these experiences
even further, because it contains a level of intimacy unlike
asynchronous forms of communication [18]. In coming
together for interaction around a shared experience, people
signal their mutual interest and trust with one another,
which in turn creates a sense of unity in the group [1].
Further, interaction drives liking of others (e.g., [3]), and in
online communities, interaction with others is a major
determinant of the extent to which people build
relationships with one another [15,22]. Attachment
increases if members have a sense of virtual co-presence, or
a subjective feeling of being together with others [21] and
synchronous interaction fosters the formation of
relationships between strangers [24]. Hence, the
combination of live streaming video with social interaction
promises a wide range of benefits for the creation and
maintenance of ties between people online.
Until recently, publishing live streaming video on the
Internet has been costly. Server-based video solutions have
required significant server and network capacity, are rather
expensive, and are feasible only for large companies and
organizations. Peer-to-peer video streaming technologies
[5] can provide high-quality streaming video at a lower
cost, by taking advantage of the network resources
available among viewers. Thus, it is now possible for online
communities to cost-effectively provide live video and chat
events for their members. We believe that these
technologies will change how people experience video,
transforming a passive viewing experience on a TV into an
active one on the computer, watching online with a
community of other viewers.
It might be argued that video is not meant to be a social, or
at least, an interactive experience. Previous work suggests
that people who are alone greatly enjoy media content from
television, movies, and music sources, and that doing so is
often used as an escape from everyday cares [9,13].
However, for others, sharing video experiences could
enhance their enjoyment of both the video content and one
another. Brown and Barkhuus [2] studied people’s
television-watching behaviors and found that one
motivation for downloading TV shows was to keep up with
Internet discussion forums. In the Social TV project [17],
researchers investigated interaction patterns among people
watching TV together. They found that viewers are adept at
both following the video content, and communicating with
each other during the show. Therefore, socializing around
media is perhaps just as important as the media itself, and
supporting social interactions during media consumption
can significantly affect, and we hope enhance, the viewing
experience.
Previous work in Interactive Television has focused on
creating systems that allow people to communicate during
live television broadcasts. AmigoTV [4] combines voice
chat with an overlay display on the TV showing avatars of
other viewers, and allows users to see what their friends are
watching. Media Center Buddies [20] allows viewers to
send instant messages and chat with one another while
watching. Telebuddies [14] encourages social interaction
both through text chat and by allowing content producers to
add quiz games and trivia contests to their broadcast.
Reality IM [6] combines social interaction with additional
contextual information about a TV program, such as
advertisements and sports statistics. However, although
each of these systems enables people to chat with one
another while watching, their creators have not performed
systematic evaluations of the effects of chat on the viewing
experience.
Distraction in Simultaneous Video and Chat?
Considerable research shows that people cannot pay close
attention to verbal information from two sources
simultaneously, and they cannot fully process material from
an auditory and a visual source, such as conversation with a
partner and onscreen dialogue [23,25]. Further, if people
watch videos or TV as an escape [9], conversing with
others might interfere with their immersion in the content.
Geerts [11] compared computer-mediated text and audio
chat while watching television, and concluded that
Interactive TV systems need to carefully balance the
activities of watching and communicating to minimize
distraction from the television program. Thus, watching live
video online while chatting with others could end in
frustration, rather than a positive experience.
MOVIELENS MOVIE NIGHT
To explore the issue of chat and video, we conducted an
initial exploratory study in the MovieLens movie
recommendation community (http://www.movielens.org).
We showed MovieLens members a series of feature films
using the End System Multicast (ESM) software ([5],
http://esm.cs.cmu.edu/). ESM enabled us to deliver live
streaming video to participants who lived around the world,
so everyone who signed up could watch the movies at the
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
878
same time. ESM also provided an IRC-based chat feature,
allowing people to chat while watching the movies.
We recruited fifteen MovieLens members to participate in
our preliminary study, through a series of email invitations
and website advertising. Five films were shown, and
participants tuned into two movies on average. Multiple
chat groups were formed per showing, and the ten
assembled chat groups had an average of four people each.
Chat Usage
Our primary question in this study was whether or not our
participants, who were strangers to one another, would chat
while watching the movie. On one hand, we felt that they
might talk with one another because they were in a study
together; on the other, they might become so engrossed in
the movie that chat would be ignored altogether. We found
that participants did in fact chat, and the chat groups each
produced an average of about 190 lines of chat over the
course of a 2.5 to 3 hour movie. This corresponds to about
1.1 lines of chat each minute. Thus, while chat occurred at a
very relaxed pace, participants nonetheless chatted.
At the end of the study, participants were asked to rate their
enjoyment of the chat on a 7-point Likert scale. They
reported moderate enjoyment on average (M = 4.3, SD =
1.6). As suggested by the large standard deviation, some
participants greatly enjoyed the chat, and felt that it helped
their understanding of the video content.
“It was very fun - it was helpful that someone who
actually understood the movie could help me understand
it - very much increased my enjoyment of it.” (ML1)
“I'm also responding positively to the notion of there
being a community of people out there sharing my
experience.” (ML3)
“For me the chat feature was a big part of what made me
tune in to the movies … If the chat hadn't been there, I
think I could just as well watch a movie on the TV, or
downloaded a movie in advance.” (ML14)
Others felt that the chat was distracting, and one did not see
any value to the chat feature at all.
“I'm not interested in chatting online, especially not
during watching a movie.” (ML6)
“[I] disliked that [the chat] was somewhat distracting;
had there been more chatter it could have become
annoying.” (ML3)
“[I] just didn't find it possible to concentrate on movie
and chat. If I'm watching a movie, I don't want/need other
stimuli.” (ML2)
Finally, one participant felt that, with practice, the
distraction might become less bothersome.
“[I] don't find it too distracting--I'm taking an online
class where we have audio and chat going at the same
time, so I'm getting used to multitasking like this” (ML13)
These comments about distraction speak directly to the
research on attentional resources cited above, as well as
Geerts’ study on chat and distraction in Interactive
Television [11]. Thus, our preliminary data reinforces the
existence of this tradeoff — the fun of sharing and
discussing a video with others, versus the potentially
negative impact of distraction on perceiving and processing
the video content. To understand this tradeoff better, and to
investigate whether it could be mitigated, we carried out a
controlled experiment.
CARTOON-WATCHING EXPERIMENT
Based on our observations in the MovieLens study, we
formulated three main research questions about the shared
video experience. First, would chat enhance the media
experience? Prior research suggests that people love
interacting when they are engaged in a mutually
entertaining activity (e.g., [16]), but does this interaction
enhance the value of the entertainment? Decades of
research suggest that social interaction increases liking (e.g.
[3]). Thus, does chat with video increase peoples’ liking for
one another?
Second, how would chat affect relationships with strangers
versus friends? We raised this question out of curiosity
about video with chat as a way to introduce newcomers to
one another in online communities. Would watching
together be an effective mechanism for breaking the ice?
Third, we wondered if structuring the video experience
might reduce distraction. Both the video and the chat
require mental processing of verbal material: one must
attend to the video to see and hear what goes on, and one
must attend to the chat to keep track of what others have
said and to formulate responses. We reasoned that perhaps
the information lost in multitasking occurs mainly in one
direction at a time. Processing chat may cause one to miss
what occurs in the video, but processing video only causes
one to miss what people are saying when they say it.
Because text chat has a history log (as we studied it),
viewers can catch up with the conversation when the
complexity of the video is low (e.g., when there is no
dialogue). Alternatively, viewers can wait for periods of
low complexity or a break, and resume chat during those
periods. If all viewers are watching at the same time,
coordinating periods of chat with viewing is not impossible.
Nonetheless, we speculated that a structured experience
with break periods designated for conversation might aid
the coordination of viewing and chat, and reduce
distraction. Our idea is akin to intermissions in a play, or
breaks in a sporting event.
From these arguments, we made the following predictions.
H1. Chat will enhance the media experience. That is, in
comparison to watching with others without chat, viewers
with chat will have more fun; they will rate the content
better; they will enjoy talking; and they will like the other
people watching with them better.
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
879
H1a. Chat will increase liking mainly among strangers,
because friends already like one another.
H2. Chat will be distracting while watching a video.
H2a. As chatting during the video is distracting,
viewers will take advantage of intermissions as a time
to chat without being distracted.
H2b. Intermissions will reduce feelings of distraction.
We used cartoons in this study because they represent the
kinds of videos seen on YouTube and Google Video, they
are a few minutes long, it is easy to insert intermissions
between them, and we could pick a diverse enough set of
content to appeal to all of our participants.
METHOD
We studied shared viewing and chat in a controlled
laboratory experiment in which small groups assembled to
watch a series of cartoons. Participants sat at separate
computers to simulate the experience of watching videos
remotely on the Internet. The order of the cartoons was
randomized between groups.
Experimental Design
To test the effect of chat on user experience (H1), we
compared groups where people were able to chat with one
another (two Chat conditions) with a control condition
where groups watched the cartoons without the chance to
chat with one another (No Chat condition). To test the
impact of chat on groups of strangers (H1a), we assembled
groups of strangers and groups of friends for the study.
To test the effects of structuring the video experience (H3),
we compared two forms of chat. In the Intermission
condition, each cartoon was separated by a brief
intermission, to give participants a period of silence where
they could chat without a video distraction. In the End
Break condition, participants were given extra time to
converse after all of the cartoons had played. In both cases,
our structuring was entirely voluntary and suggestive;
participants could chat whenever they wanted.
This experiment used a 3 X 2 between-groups factorial
design with Video Structure (No Chat, Intermissions, End
Break) and Group Composition (Friends, Strangers) as the
independent variables (Table 1).
Participants
The sample was 85 participants in 30 groups. Participants
were recruited in groups of two to four people (M = 2.8)
from the psychology experiment directory at CMU. To
recruit groups of friends, we asked that people interested in
the experiment find two friends to participate with them. To
recruit strangers, participants simply signed up in one of the
time slots we offered. Group size did not differ significantly
among the experimental conditions (F [3,16] = .6, n.s.).
The average age of the participants was 24.3 years (SD =
7.3 years); approximately half were female. Seventy-five
percent of participants were students, five percent were
faculty or staff, and the rest were alumni, retired or did not
list their affiliation. Participants were paid $15 each for
their participation, which took approximately one hour.
Overall, watching video was a popular activity for our
participants. Fifty-six percent of participants reported
watching videos on YouTube or Google Video, and 61%
reported watching movies or television more than once a
week in the past month. Thirty-nine percent of participants
reported renting movies from vendors like NetFlix and
Blockbuster.
Procedure
Participants were informed that they would watch a series
of cartoons on the computer, and take a survey at the end.
Participants were seated in an arrangement such that they
were visually separated from one another. While
participants remained in audio range to one another, they
wore headphones to hear audio from the computer. No
group chatted aloud to one another, although several
participants did laugh out loud during the study.
As this study was conducted using laboratory machines on
a LAN, we used Windows Media Player to play streaming
video from a server on the LAN. Everyone watched the
same content at the same time. We also used the mIRC IRC
client (http://www.mirc.com/) for chat, and collected chat
logs using an open-source IRC server, instrumented to log
timestamps, message senders and the contents of each line
of chat. A picture of the typical arrangement of a
participant’s screen is shown in Figure 1. Participants were
allowed to rearrange the window positions and sizes to their
liking, and about one-third of participants did this.
We showed participants seven cartoons. The cartoons came
from Channel Frederator, a popular online video podcast.
The cartoons followed themes of education, humor, love,
character struggles, and a music video. The podcast
encourages its members to rate their cartoons on a 5-point
Likert scale, and we chose cartoons that were well liked by
the community (M = 4.0, range = 3.8 to 4.3). None of our
participants had previously seen these cartoons before.
Video Structure
No Chat Intermissions End Break
Friends 5 groups 5 groups 5 groups
Group
Composition
Strangers 5 groups 5 groups 5 groups
Table 1. Experimental design.
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
880
Each cartoon lasted between three and six minutes. In the
Intermission condition, one-minute intermissions were
placed in between each cartoon. In the End Break
condition, participants were given a six-minute period for
discussion at the end of the cartoons, keeping the break
time the same for these conditions.
In both chat conditions, participants were told that they
could chat with the other participants at any time during the
study (cartoons or breaks), about any topic. Participants
were only told of the availability of the chat feature, not that
it was a mandatory requirement of their participation. In the
No Chat condition, participants did not have the chat
feature and did not receive the breaks.
Measures
All participants rated each cartoon immediately after it had
finished, to avoid difficulties in recall. These ratings were
made on 5-point Likert scales, representing how much they
liked each cartoon. All participants also completed a final
survey consisting of 10 questions about chat, the watching
experience, and the other people in their group (several
questions were omitted for participants without chat).
Exploratory factor analysis revealed that four factors
accounted for most of the item variance and thus four scales
were constructed (Table 2).
RESULTS
We first briefly present data pertaining to the usage and
pace of the chat. We then discuss tests of the hypotheses.
We also describe the conversations that occurred in the
groups, to give a sense of the experience of watching
together, from our participants’ perspectives.
Chat Amount and Pace
On average, the 20 groups with chat produced an average of
233 (SD = 174) lines of chat, at a rate of approximately 5
lines of chat per minute. Not surprisingly, groups of friends
(M [SD] = 337 [158] lines) chatted more than groups of
strangers (M [SD] = 129 [123] lines; F [1,15] = 8.5, p =
.01). Video Structure did not affect the amount of chat
(intermission M [SD] = 205.1 [161.3] lines, end break M
[SD] = 261.4 [190.6] lines, F [1,16] = .74, n.s.).
Chat among friends occurred at a rapid pace, with an
average message inter-arrival time of 8.1 seconds (SD =
14.2 sec., median = 5 sec.). In stranger groups, chat
occurred at about half the rate, with an average message
inter-arrival time of 15.7 seconds (SD = 37.0 sec., median =
7 sec.), and this difference was statistically significant (F
[1,4625] = 7.6, p < .01).
For strangers, intermissions slowed the pace of chat.
Stranger groups with intermissions had an average message
inter-arrival time of 27.7 seconds (SD = 60.5 sec., median =
11 sec.), and stranger groups with an end break had an
average message inter-arrival time of 9.9 seconds (SD =
12.7 sec., median = 6 sec., F [1,4641] = 176.9, p < .001).
Chat pace in friend groups was not affected by
intermissions (F [1,4641] = .94, n.s.).
Effects of Chat on the Media Experience
Our first hypothesis (H1) was that chat would enhance the
media experience; people would have more fun watching
the cartoons together with chat, they would rate the content
higher, they would enjoy using the chat feature, and they
would like the other people in their group better. To test this
hypothesis, we examined cartoon ratings, and the scales
measuring fun and enjoyment, chat enjoyment, liking, and
closeness. The analyses discussed are ANOVAs using
Group Composition (Friends vs. Strangers) and Video
Structure (No Chat vs. Intermissions vs. End Break) as
independent variables. Because each group had multiple
members, we included group as a random effect. In some
cases, we perform contrasts between groups with chat
(Intermissions and End Break) and groups without chat.
Figure 1. Typical arrangement of video and chat windows.
Participants were allowed to move and resize the windows
to their individual preference.
Scale Items Example item α
Fun and
enjoyment
2 “I had fun watching the
cartoons”
.93
Chat
enjoyment
3 “I enjoyed chatting with
other people”
.89
Liking of
others
4 “I liked them” .81
Closeness Up to
3
“During the study, how
close did you feel to
Participant X?”
.84
Table 2. Scales used in experiment. Items were rated on a
5-point Likert scale (strongly disagree to strongly agree).
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
881
Overall, we found that chat neither enhanced nor detracted
from the enjoyment of the experience, but it did have
significantly positive effects on people’s relationships with
others in the group.
Cartoon Ratings
On average, cartoons received a rating of 3.3 out of 5 (5
highest). Treating the individual cartoon ratings as a scale, a
principle components analysis revealed three components
with an Eigenvalue greater than 1: two “poor” cartoons (M
[SD] = 2.5 [1.1]), three “okay” cartoons (M [SD] = 3.3
[1.1]), and three “good” cartoons (M [SD] = 3.8 [.7]). The
correlation of our participants’ ratings and the ratings from
Channel Frederator was .62. To account for these
differences, and because cartoon ratings were correlated
with other aspects of the experience (Table 3), we included
a factor of cartoon quality, with three levels, in the ANOVA
as a control variable.
We found a marginally significant interaction between
Video Structure and cartoon ratings (F [4,213] = 2.3, p =
.06) on the cartoon ratings (Figure 2). A contrast between
the groups with and without chat indicates that groups with
chat enjoyed poor cartoons more than groups without chat
(F [1,213] = 4.5, p = .03). Thus, chat can supplement poor
material by making the experience of watching it more
enjoyable.
Fun and Enjoyment
Fun was significantly correlated with participants’ average
cartoon ratings (Table 3). However, the ANOVA predicting
fun from Group Composition (Friends vs. Strangers) and
Video Structure (Intermissions vs. End Break) showed no
significant main effects or interactions.
Video Structure also did not affect enjoyment of chat (F
[1,37] = .11, n.s.). However, friends enjoyed the chat more
than strangers (friends M [SD] = 4.4 [.57], strangers M
[SD] = 4.0 [.67], F [1,34] = 4.0, p = .05).
Liking and Closeness
As shown in Figure 3, there was a significant main effect of
chat on liking. Participants with the chat feature liked their
other group members more (M [SD] = 4.2 [.7]) than
participants without the chat feature (M [SD] = 3.5 [.7]), F
(1,49) = 15.7, p < .001. As expected, friends liked each
other more (M [SD] = 4.4 [.6]) than strangers (M [SD] =
3.6 [.8]), F (1,49) = 24.5, p < .001. Friends with chat also
liked each other more (M [SD] = 4.5 [.54]) than friends
without chat (M [SD] = 4.0 [.61]), F (1,49) = 5.2, p = .03.
The ANOVA on closeness (Figure 4) also showed a
significant main effect of chat. Participants with chat felt
closer to others in the group (M [SD] = 3.6 [1.8]) than those
without chat (M [SD] = 2.2 [1.5]), F (1,54) = 21.5, p < .001.
Further, friend groups felt closer with chat (M [SD] = 4.9
[1.3]) than without (M [SD]= 3.0 [1.6]), F (1,54) = 21.3, p <
.001. Stranger groups also felt closer with chat (M [SD] =
2.1 [.94]) than without chat (M [SD] = 1.3 [.44]), F (1,54) =
4.0, p = .05. Finally, friends felt closer (M [SD] = 4.3 [1.7])
than strangers (M [SD] = 1.9 [.90]), F(1,54)=73.7, p < .001.
Figure 2. Effect of chat on ratings for poor, okay and good
cartoons.
Figure 3. Effect of chat on liking of others.
Rate Fun Enjoy Like Close
Cartoon
ratings
(Rate)
1.0 .47‡ .23 .26* .24*
Fun &
enjoyment
(Fun)
1.0 .29* .26* .11
Chat
enjoyment
(Enjoy)
1.0 .58‡ .39†
Liking of
others
(Like)
1.0 .63‡
Closeness
to others
(Close)
1.0
Table 3. Correlations of the cartoon ratings and scales.
N = 84 for all scales, except N = 54 for Chat enjoyment.
*p < .05, †p < .01, ‡p < .001
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
882
Chat and Distraction
As in the MovieLens study, participants in this study
mentioned being distracted by the chat. Intermissions and
the end break were added to this study in order to give
people an opportunity to chat without missing video
content. Participants took advantage of these breaks,
conducting roughly 33% of their chat during the breaks,
even through the breaks only accounted for about 10% of
the time spent in the experiment. However, the majority of
chat (62%) occurred during the cartoons, which accounted
for about 70% of the time in the experiment. The remaining
5% of chat was spoken either before the cartoons began, or
after they ended. The type of break (Intermission vs. End
Break) did not influence how much chat occurred during
the cartoons or the breaks (during the cartoons, F [1,16] =
.4, n.s.; during the breaks, F [1,16] = .01, n.s.).
Although the structure of the breaks did not influence when
participants chatted, it did influence how distracted they
felt. Participants were asked how distracted they felt from
the chat feature, on a 7-point Likert scale (1 = not distracted
at all, 7 = very distracted). Participants with intermissions
reported feeling less distracted (M [SD] = 3.6 [1.9]) than
participants with an end break (M [SD] = 4.1 [2.0]). This
difference is marginally significant, F (1,54) = 3.7, p = .06,
suggesting that intermissions tended to reduce feelings of
distraction from the chat. Further, the average distraction of
End Break groups was significantly correlated with the
amount of chat that occurred during the cartoons (r = .8, p =
.006), whereas the average distraction of Intermission
groups was not correlated with the amount of chat that
occurred during the cartoons (r = .07, n.s.).
One explanation for the difference in distraction is that
groups with intermissions simply chatted less than groups
with an end break, and thus felt less distracted. However,
Intermission groups didn’t produce a significantly different
amount of chat (M [SD] = 205.1 [161.3] lines) as End
Break groups (M [SD] = 261.4 [190.6] lines), F (1,18) = .5,
n.s. Further, Intermission groups did not differ significantly
from End Break groups in the amount of chat during the
cartoons (intermission M [SD] = 129.5 [117.3] lines, end
break M [SD] = 161.3 [134.8] lines, F [1,16] = .4, n.s).
Break Preferences
As mentioned earlier, introducing intermissions into a
sequence of cartoon videos is analogous to introducing
commercials in sports programming during breaks in play.
While they take advantage of the natural breaks in the
game, they can fragment the experience, and may frustrate
viewers who wish the breaks were shorter or nonexistent.
We asked participants about their opinions of the break
periods, and which type of break they would prefer. The
results were overwhelming: 100% of participants with
intermissions reported preferring intermissions, and 52% of
participants with an end break reported wanting an
intermission. Further, there was no difference in break
preferences between friends and strangers (χ2 = .9, n.s.).
On the other hand, participants also wanted flexibility for
when they chatted. Of the 57 participants with chat, the
majority reported that they preferred to chat throughout the
entire experience (63%), rather confining their chat to just
the break periods (23%), just the cartoons (9%), or not
chatting at all (5%). This finding suggests that people
would not like enforced chat periods, and their behavior
confirms it (62% of the lines of chat spoken during the
experiment were spoken during the cartoons).
Chat Content
For both friend and stranger groups, the cartoons were a
major topic of conversation. Favorite chat topics included
“the cartoons themselves” (C16), “the music and the quality
of the drawings” (C22), “the rating” (C23), “how good each
cartoon was” (C27) and “[the] artistry of videos” (C58).
Participants also made jokes and talked about their lives.
For example:
“We discussed some stuff about our professors by
comparing them to the characters. One was related to
[two] professors who are a couple and that was
hilarious.” (C1)
“I liked chatting with my friends about our inside jokes.
It may appear that we don’t like each other, but there is
so much love between the three of us that it is hard for a
stranger to imagine.” (C4)
Stranger groups were able to find common ground with
each other, and their favorite topics included “information
about graduate school” (C13), “smoothies at Lulu’s” (C53,
about a local restaurant) and “rating the cartoons” (C56).
To follow up on these informal impressions, we conducted
a detailed coding of the chat logs to understand how much
participants spoke about different topics. We used the “line
of chat” as our unit of coding, but as the content in a single
line was not always enough to determine an adequate code,
we considered each line of chat in its context.
Figure 4. Effect of chat on feelings of closeness.
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
883
We developed our coding scheme iteratively, developing
codes by reading through the chat logs, coding a subset of
the chat, and then resolving discrepancies by clarifying the
definition of the category, or adding or removing
categories. The reliability check was performed by the first
author and an independent coder on 12% of the chat lines.
We achieved a good inter-rater reliability after four
iterations (Cohen’s Kappa = .78).
The categories were: the cartoons, evaluations and ratings
of the cartoons, personal topics, laughter, study chat, and
greetings & partings. Each line of chat was coded under
only one of these categories, except for laughter, which
frequently co-occurred with other chat, and thus was coded
separately. A breakdown of the amount of chat in each
coding category is shown in Table 4.
Cartoon, Personal and Evaluation Chat
A large majority of the lines of chat, 41.6%, were about the
cartoons, as well as relations of the cartoons to people’s
lives. For example, participant C59 said, “this is my
husband at work on our house,” and participant C2 said,
“we must ask lisa if this is [what] happened to her home
today” while watching the cartoon about a plumber.
Participants also spoke about their personal lives during the
chats without reference to the cartoons, talking about their
course of study, the weather, sporting events, roommates,
and even marriage. About 23% of chat was personal and
unrelated to the video.
We performed ANOVAs on the percentages of chat in these
categories, controlling for the duration of the chat. There
were no effects of the independent variables on the cartoon
category, but End Break groups tended to have more
personal chat (M [SD] = 24.6% [17.0%]) than Intermission
groups (M [SD] = 11.8% [10.8%]), F (1,16) = 4.0, p = .06.
About 14% of the chats were about participants’
evaluations of the cartoons. Strangers chatted about the
cartoon ratings about twice as much as friends (30% vs.
15%), but this difference was not statistically significant (F
[1,16] = 2.6, n.s.).
Laughter
Spontaneous laughter occurred frequently. We coded
laughter by looking for “lol”, “haha”, etc. We also coded
happy smilies such as :) and :D, as they were often used to
express positive emotions. In total, 7.4% of the lines of chat
solely consisted of laughter, and 9.4% of the lines of chat
contained some form of laughter. Strangers did not differ
from friends in their laughter (F [1,16] = .83, n.s.).
Chat Likes and Dislikes
In the survey, participants were asked what they liked and
disliked about the chat feature, and several themes emerged.
Fifty-four participants listed reasons for why they liked
chat, including: chat was entertaining, it made the
experience more fun, and enabled them to make jokes
(33%); chat promoted sharing and discussion, and learning
other people’s opinions (41%); and chat made boring
material more fun (9%).
Fifty-two participants listed reasons for not liking the chat:
chat was distracting (31%); it was hard to think about chat
topics, they felt forced to chat, or they were unsure of what
to say to strangers (13%), or complaints about the user
interface (8%). Nineteen participants simply wrote
“nothing”, suggesting they were satisfied with the chat.
Category Example chat (original form) % chat
Cartoons “the colors are pale looks like a bad chinese cartoon of the late 80's” (C21)
“i thought the penguin one had really good music too” (C34)
“the dots are supposed to represent human activity and thier choas + beauty” (C59)
41.6
Evaluations “[this] music is awesome” (C20)
“hmm so far i actually like the pengiun one the best” (C34)
“That was a bit gross although it was a bit funny” (C15)
13.7
Personal “im doing sociology and urban studies” (C34)
“it is supposed to rain this evening?” (C59)
“what's the Catholic deal with seperation...I know divorce is a big no no” (C11)
22.8
Study “im so happy we're doing this, this is a bonding experience” (C5)
“we only have 2 more [cartoons], Im kinda sad about it” (C45).
12.7
Laughter “:D”, “haha”, “lol” and many variations thereof
“haha, happy endings are overrated” (C16)
7.4 solo
9.4 mixed
Greetings &
partings
“hi”, “hello”, “yo”, “bye” and many variations thereof 1.8
Table 4. Examples of chat in each coding category. Lines of chat were coded into one of these categories, except for laughter,
which included lines of chat either solely consisting of laughter (7.4%), or containing other content (9.4%).
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
884
DISCUSSION
We set out to learn about the activity of watching video
together and to understand the role of communication while
watching a video. Our first study, in the MovieLens online
community, showed that strangers would watch video and
engage in chat with others. For some, chat added a sense of
community and awareness of others. For others, chat was a
burden; another source of information to be monitored in
addition to the video. Understanding this tradeoff and how
to mitigate it was the focus of our second study.
Effects of Chat on the Viewing Experience
For the cartoon study, we made several predictions based
on our experience with the MovieLens study. The first was
that chat would enhance the experience of watching
together (H1): people would have more fun, they would rate
the content higher, they would enjoy using the chat, and
they would like the other people watching with them better.
In turn, we found that while people did enjoy using the
chat, chat did not have a significant effect on fun;
participants with and without chat both had fun in the study.
One possible explanation for this null result is a ceiling
effect. Because we selected highly rated cartoons from
Channel Frederator, watching the cartoons was already fun
for most participants.
We also found that chat made poor content better (Figure
2), perhaps best described by a comment made in one of the
chat groups, “I feel bad....I really am paying more attention
to the chat than the cartoons...primarily because we are so
much more entertaining” (C11). Some participants also
described this effect when they listed benefits of chat.
We predicted chat would have positive effects on social
outcomes, primarily among strangers (H1a). With chat,
both friends and strangers increased their liking and
closeness to one another with chat. However, our results are
from between-groups comparisons; thus, we cannot know
exactly how much chat improved liking and closeness, nor
can we estimate the duration of these effects.
Chat, Breaks and Distraction
Our second hypothesis (H2) predicted that people would be
distracted while chatting and watching a video, and we
found that this was the case. However, participants did not
confine their chat to solely the break periods (H2a), and the
amount of laughter chat shows that chatting in real-time had
some benefits. Social laughter is known to increase
people’s enjoyment and evaluations of material [10] and
many participants enjoyed making jokes in the chat.
Intermissions did reduce feelings of distraction (H2b), even
though they did not influence the extent to which people
chatted during the cartoons. Overall, intermissions did not
have a negative impact on participants’ enjoyment of chat,
and participants overwhelmingly preferred intermissions;
all participants with intermissions preferred them to an end
break, and over half of the participants with an end break
would have preferred intermissions.
Lessons Learned
Our research is an initial investigation into the social effects
of Interactive TV. Overall, our results suggest that chatting
while watching videos is a fun, engaging activity, enjoyed
both by friends and strangers. For friends, shared activities
are often used as a way to cement friendships, because they
provide something to talk about [8]. For strangers, chatting
while watching provides an opportunity to form new
relationships, as the videos provided common ground (65%
of their chat was about cartoons or evaluations). However,
the videos alone may not be enough to sustain conversation,
as some people reported running out of things to say and
feeling awkward. We speculate that moderated discussions
may be beneficial for strangers, especially when coupled
with an end break to reduce distraction.
Finally, we learned that structuring the video experience
with intermissions during natural break periods reduces
feelings of distraction.
Limitations and Future Work
Many questions are raised by our studies. First, although we
have found one approach to reducing feelings of distraction
from integrating chat and video, there are many others. One
might use a cleverer user interface design, for example, by
timing the onset of chat for more ideal times (e.g. during
non-dialogue parts of the video), by merging the chat into
the video window, or by using audio chat as in AmigoTV
[4]. Clutter and other human factors issues would need to
be addressed.
Genre seems to play an important role in the shared video
experience, and it is important to understand how
techniques for reducing distraction interact with genre. We
found that intermissions worked well for short cartoons.
However, many television programs place commercials in
the midst of the drama, and it is unclear if they would have
the same effect at reducing distraction, and if interaction
during these periods would help or harm the experience.
Finally, our results pertaining to strangers must be taken
with care. We brought strangers to the laboratory for
purposes of chatting while watching cartoons, and they did
just that. Participants in the MovieLens study were also
strangers to one another, and in that study it was clear that
for some people, chatting while watching was not an
activity in which they were interested. Thus, understanding
their reasons for disinterest, as compared to the enjoyment
of strangers in the cartoon experiment, are of importance to
media producers and online community leaders, so they can
appeal to and engage a wider audience.
CONCLUSION
New peer-to-peer video streaming technologies promise to
fundamentally change how we experience media. No longer
will the experience be passive, or confined to the social
boundaries imposed by the physical world. Watching video
online enables us to actively engage with each other as we
engage with the video, but active engagement comes at a
CHI 2007 Proceedings • Video April 28-May 3, 2007 • San Jose, CA, USA
885
cost. Attention is a limited resource, and we have shown
that while chatting and watching simultaneously is fun, and
has social benefits, it is also distracting. Intermissions can
help reduce this distraction, although they may not be
appropriate for all types of content. Therefore, future
research is needed to gain a better understanding of the
viewing experience, and understand what factors contribute
to a successful experience and successful interactions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the ESM and MovieLens teams for
their support. We would also like to thank our anonymous
coder for his help in coding the chat transcripts. This work
was supported by National Science Foundation grants IIS-
0325049, CNS-0520187, CNS-0085920 and CNS-0435382.
REFERENCES
1. Arkin, R. M., and Burger, J. M. Effects of unit relation
tendencies on interpersonal attraction. Social
Psychology Quarterly, 1980, 43, 380-391.
2. Brown, B., Barkhuus, L. The television will be
revolutionized: effects of PVRs and filesharing on
television watching. In Proc. of CHI 2006. ACM Press,
New York, NY, 663-666.
3. Cartwright, D., and Zander, A. Group cohesiveness:
Introduction. 1953. In D. Cartwright & A. Zander
(Eds.), Group dynamics: Research and theory.
Evanston, IL: Row Peterson.
4. Coppens, T., Trappeniers, L., Godon, M. AmigoTV:
towards a social TV experience. In Proc. EuroITV 2004,
University of Brighton, U.K.
5. Chu, Y., Ganjam, A., Ng, T. S. E., Rao, S.,
Sripanidkulchai, K., Zhan, J., Zhang, H. Early
experience with an Internet broadcast system based on
overlay multicast. In USENIX Annual Technical
Conference, 2004.
6. Chuah, M. Reality instant messaging: injecting a dose of
reality into online chat. In CHI 2003 Extended
Abstracts. ACM Press, New York, NY, 926-927.
7. Czerwinski, M., Cutrell, E., & Horvitz, E. Instant
messaging and interruption: Influence of task type on
performance. Proceedings of OZCHI 2000, Sydney,
Australia, Dec. 4-8.
8. Deaux, K., & Major, B. (1987). Putting gender into
context: An interactive model of gender-related
behavior. Psychological Review, 94, 369-389.
9. Finn, S. and Gorr, M.B. Social isolation and social
support as correlates of television viewing motivation.
Communications Research, 2001, 15, 135-158.
10.Fuller, R. and Sheehy-Skeffington, A. Effects of group
laughter on responses to humorous material: A
replication and extension. Psychological Reports, 1974,
35 (1, pt. 2), 531-534.
11.Geerts, D. Comparing voice chat and text chat in a
communication tool for interactive television. In Proc.
NordiCHI 2006. ACM Press, New York, NY, 461-464.
12.Helft, M. Young Internet Producers, Bankrolled, Are
Seeking Act II. The New York Times (Sept. 25, 2006),
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/25/technology/25digg
.html
13.Hills, P., and Argyle, M. Positive moods derived from
leisure and their relationships to happiness and
personality. Personality and Individual Differences,
1998, 25, 523-535.
14.Luyten, K., Thys, K., Huypens, S., and Connix, K.
Telebuddies: social stitching with interactive television.
In CHI 2006 Extended Abstracts. ACM Press, New
York, NY, 1049-1054.
15.McKenna, K. Y. A., Green, A. S., & Gleason, M. E. J.
Relationship formation on the Internet: What's the big
attraction? Journal of Social Issues, 2002, 58(1), 9-31.
16.Nardi, B., and Harris, J. Strangers and friends:
Collaborative play in World of Warcraft. In Proc.
CSCW 2006. ACM Press, New York, NY, 149-158.
17.Oehlberg, L., Ducheneaut, N., Thornton, J. D., Moore,
R. J., Nickell, E. Social TV: Designing for distributed,
sociable television viewing. In Proc. EuroITV 2006,
Athens, Greece.
18.Powazek, D. M. Design for community: The art of
connecting real people in virtual places. 2002.
Indianapolis, IN: New Riders Publishing.
19.Putnam, R. D. Tuning in, tuning out: The strange
disappearance of social capital in America. PS: Political
Science and Politics, 1995, 28(4), 664-683.
20.Regan, T., and Todd, I. Media center buddies: instant
messaging around a media center. In Proc. NordiCHI
2004. ACM Press, New York, NY, 141-144.
21.Slater, M., Sadagic, A., and Schroeder, R. Small-group
behavior in a virtual and real environment: A
comparative study. Presence, Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 2000, 9(1), 37-51.
22.Utz, S. Social identification and interpersonal attraction
in MUDs. Swiss Journal of Psychology, 2003, 62(2), 91-
101.
23.Welford, A. T. Single channel operation in the brain.
Acta Psychologica, 1967, 27, 5-21.
24.Weisz, J. D., Erickson, T., and Kellogg, W. A.
Synchronous broadcast messaging: The use of ICT. In
Proc. CHI 2006. ACM Press, New York, NY, 1293-
1302.
25.Wickens, C. D. Multiple resources and performance
prediction. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science,
2002, 3(2), 159-177.