Hierarchical Dirichlet Processes
YW Teh
#Abstract
We consider problems involving groups of data, where each observation within a group is a draw from a mixture model, and where it is desirable to share mixture components between groups. We assume that the number of mixture components is unknown a priori and is to be inferred from the data. In this setting it is natural to consider sets of Dirichlet processes, one for each group, where the well-known clustering property of the Dirichlet process provides a nonparametric prior for the number of mixture componentswithin each group. Given our desire to tie the mixture models in the various groups, we consider a hierarchical model, specifically one in which the base measure for the child Dirichlet processes is itself distributed according to a Dirichlet process. Such a base measure being discrete, the child Dirichlet processes necessarily share atoms. Thus, as desired, the mixture models in the different groups necessarily share mixture components. We discuss representations of hierarchical Dirichlet processes in terms of a stick-breaking process, and a generalization of the Chinese restaurant process that we refer to as the “Chinese restaurant franchise.” We present Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms for posterior inference in hierarchical Dirichlet process mixtures, and describe applications to problems in information retrieval and text modelling.
#1 INTRODUCTION
A recurring theme in statistics is the need to separate observations into groups, and yet allow the groups to remain linked—to “share statistical strength.” In the Bayesian formalism such sharing is achieved naturally via hierarchical modeling; parameters are shared among groups, and the randomness of the parameters induces dependencies among the groups. Estimates based on the posterior distribution exhibit “shrinkage.”
In the current paper we explore a hierarchical approach to the problem of model-based clustering of grouped data. We assume that the data are subdivided into a set of groups, and that within each group we wish to find clusters that capture latent structure in the data assigned to that group. The number of clusters within each group is unknown and is to be inferred. Moreover, in a sense that we make precise, we wish to allow clusters to be shared among the groups.
An example of the kind of problem that motivates us can be found in genetics. Consider a set of k binary markers (e.g., single nucleotide polymorphisms or “SNPs”) in a localized region of the human genome. While an individual human could exhibit any of 2k different patterns of markers on a single chromosome, in real populations only a small subset of such patterns—haplotypes—are actually observed (Gabriel et al. 2002). Given a meiotic model for the combination of a pair of haplotypes into a genotype during mating, and given a set of observed genotypes in a sample from a human population, it is of great interest to identify the underlying haplotypes (Stephens et al. 2001). Now consider an extension of this problem in which the population is divided into a set of groups; e.g., African, Asian and European subpopulations. We may not only want to discover the sets of haplotypes within each subpopulation, but we may also wish to discover which haplotypes are shared between subpopulations. The identification of such haplotypes would have significant implications for the understanding of the migration patterns of ancestral populations of humans.
As a second example, consider the problem from the field of information retrieval (IR) of modeling of relationships among sets of documents. In IR, documents are generally modeled under an exchangeability assumption, the “bag of words” assumption, in which the order of words in a document is ignored (Salton and McGill 1983). It is also common to view the words in a document as arising from a number of latent clusters or “topics,” where a topic is generally modeled as a multinomial probability distribution on words from some basic vocabulary (Blei et al. 2003). Thus, in a document concerned with university funding the words in the document might be drawn from the topics “education” and “finance.” Considering a collection of such documents, we may wish to allow topics to be shared among the documents in the corpus. For example, if the corpus also contains a document concerned with university football, the topics may be “education” and “sports,” and we would want the former topic to be related to that discovered in the analysis of the document on university funding.
Moreover, we may want to extend the model to allow for multiple corpora. For example, documents in scientific journals are often grouped into themes (e.g., “empirical process theory,” “multivariate statistics,” “survival analysis”), and it would be of interest to discover to what extent the latent topics that are shared among documents are also shared across these groupings. Thus in general we wish to consider the sharing of clusters across multiple, nested groupings of data.
Our approach to the problem of sharing clusters among multiple, related groups is a nonparametric Bayesian approach, reposing on the Dirichlet process (Ferguson 1973). The Dirichlet process DP(0,G0) is a measure on measures. It has two parameters, a scaling parameter 0 > 0 and a base probability measure G0. An explicit representation of a draw from a Dirichlet process (DP) was given by Sethuraman (1994), who showed that if G  DP(0,G0), then with probability one: where the k are independent random variables distributed according to G0, where k is an atom at k, and where the “stick-breaking weights” k are also random and depend on the parameter 0 (the definition of the k is provided in Section 3.1).
The representation in (1) shows that draws from a DP are discrete (with probability one). The discrete nature of the DP makes it unsuitable for general applications in Bayesian nonparametrics, but it is well suited for the problem of placing priors on mixture components in mixture modeling. The idea is basically to associate a mixture component with each atom in G. Introducing indicator variables to associate data points with mixture components, the posterior distribution yields a probability distribution on partitions of the data. A number of authors have studied such Dirichlet process mixture models (Antoniak 1974; Escobar and West 1995; MacEachern and M¨uller 1998).
These models provide an alternative to methods that attempt to select a particular number of mixture components, or methods that place an explicit parametric prior on the number of components. Let us now consider the setting in which the data are subdivided into a number of groups. Given our goal of solving a clustering problem within each group, we consider a set of random measures Gj , one for each group j, where Gj is distributed according to a group-specific Dirichlet process DP(0j ,G0j). To link these clustering problems, we link the group-specific DPs. Many authors have considered ways to induce dependencies among multiple DPs via links among the parameters G0j and/or 0j (Cifarelli and Regazzini 1978; MacEachern 1999; Tomlinson 1998; M¨uller et al. 2004; De Iorio et al. 2004; Kleinman and Ibrahim 1998; Mallick and Walker 1997; Ishwaran and James 2004). Focusing on the G0j , one natural proposal is a hierarchy in which the measures Gj are conditionally independent draws from a single underlying Dirichlet process DP(0,G0( )), where G0( ) is a parametric distribution with random parameter  (Carota and Parmigiani 2002; Fong et al. 2002; Muliere and Petrone 1993). Integrating over  induces dependencies among the DPs. That this simple hierarchical approach will not solve our problem can be observed by considering the case in which G0( ) is absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure for almost all  (e.g., G0 is Gaussian with mean  ). In this case, given that the draws Gj arise as conditionally independent draws from G0( ), they necessarily have no atoms in common (with probability one).
Thus, although clusters arise within each group via the discreteness of draws from a DP, the atoms associated with the different groups are different and there is no sharing of clusters between groups. This problem can be skirted by assuming that G0 lies in a discrete parametric family, but such an assumption would be overly restrictive.
Our proposed solution to the problem is straightforward: to force G0 to be discrete and yet have broad support, we consider a nonparametric hierarchical model in which G0 is itself a draw from a Dirichlet process DP( ,H). This restores flexibility in that the modeler can choose H to be continuous or discrete. In either case, with probability one, G0 is discrete and has a stick-breaking representation as in (1). The atoms k are shared among the multiple DPs, yielding the desired sharing of atoms among groups. In summary, we consider the hierarchical specification: which we refer to as a hierarchical Dirichlet process. The immediate extension to hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture models yields our proposed formalism for sharing clusters among related clustering problems.
Related nonparametric approaches to linking multiple DPs have been discussed by a number of authors. Our approach is a special case of a general framework for “dependent Dirichlet processes” due to MacEachern (1999) and MacEachern et al. (2001). In this framework the random variables k and k in (1) are general stochastic processes (i.e., indexed collections of random variables); this allows very general forms of dependency among DPs. Our hierarchical approach fits into this framework; we endow the stick-breaking weights k in (1) with a second subscript indexing the groups j, and view the weights jk as dependent for each fixed value of k. Indeed, as we show in Section 4, the definition in (2) yields a specific, canonical form of dependence among the weights  Our approach is also a special case of a framework referred to as analysis of densities (AnDe) by Tomlinson (1998) and Tomlinson and Escobar (2003). The AnDe model is a hierarchical model for multiple DPs in which the common base measure G0 is random, but rather than treating G0 as a draw from a DP, as in our case, it is treated as a draw from a mixture of DPs. The resulting G0 is continuous in general (Antoniak 1974), which, as we have discussed, is ruinous for our problem of sharing clusters. It is an appropriate choice, however, for the problem addressed by Tomlinson (1998), which is that of sharing statistical strength among multiple sets of density estimation problems. Thus, while the AnDe framework and our hierarchical DP framework are closely related formally, the inferential goal is rather different. Moreover, as we will see, our restriction to discrete G0 has important implications for the design of efficient MCMC inference algorithms.
The terminology of “hierarchical Dirichlet process” has also been used by M¨uller et al. (2004) to describe a different notion of hierarchy than the one discussed here. These authors consider a model in which a coupled set of random measures Gj are defined as Gj = F0 + (1 − )Fj , where F0 and the Fj are draws from DPs. This model provides an alternative approach to sharing clusters, one in which the shared clusters are given the same stick-breaking weights (those associated with F0) in each of the groups. By contrast, in our hierarchical model, the draws Gj are based on the same underlying base measure G0, but each draw assigns different stick-breaking weights to the shared atoms associated with G0. Thus, atoms can be partially shared.
Finally, the terminology of “hierarchical Dirichlet process” has been used in yet a third way by Beal et al. (2002) in the context of a model known as the infinite hidden Markov model, a hidden Markov model with a countably infinite state space. The “hierarchical Dirichlet process” of Beal et al. (2002) is, however, not a hierarchy in the Bayesian sense; rather, it is an algorithmic description of a coupled set of urn models. We discuss this model in more detail in Section 7, where we show that the notion of hierarchical DP presented here yields an elegant treatment of the infinite hidden
Markov model.
In summary, the notion of hierarchical Dirichlet process that we explore is a specific example of a dependency model for multiple Dirichlet processes, one specifically aimed at the problem of sharing clusters among related groups of data. It involves a simple Bayesian hierarchy where the base measure for a set of Dirichlet processes is itself distributed according to a Dirichlet process. While there are many ways to couple Dirichlet processes, we view this simple, canonical Bayesian hierarchy as particularly worthy of study. Note in particular the appealing recursiveness of the definition; a hierarchical Dirichlet process can be readily extended to multiple hierarchical levels.
This is natural in applications. For example, in our application to document modeling, one level of hierarchy is needed to share clusters among multiple documents within a corpus, and second level of hierarchy is needed to share clusters among multiple corpora. Similarly, in the genetics example, it is of interest to consider nested subdivisions of populations according to various criteria (geographic, cultural, economic), and to consider the flow of haplotypes on the resulting tree.
As is the case with other nonparametric Bayesian methods, a significant component of the challenge in working with the hierarchical Dirichlet process is computational. To provide a general framework for designing procedures for posterior inference in the hierarchical Dirichlet process that parallel those available for the Dirichlet process, it is necessary to develop analogs for the hierarchical Dirichlet process of some of the representations that have proved useful in the Dirichlet process setting. We provide these analogs in Section 4 where we discuss a stick-breaking representation of the hierarchical Dirichlet process, an analog of the P´olya urn model that we refer to as the “Chinese restaurant franchise,” and a representation of the hierarchical Dirichlet process in terms of an infinite limit of finite mixture models. With these representations as background, we present MCMC algorithms for posterior inference under hierarchical Dirichlet process mixtures in Section 5. We present experimental results in Section 6 and present our conclusions in Section 8.
#2 SETTING
We are interested in problems where the observations are organized into groups, and assumed exchangeable both within each group and across groups. To be precise, letting j index the groups and i index the observations within each group, we assume that xj1, xj2, . . . are exchangeable within each group j. We also assume that the observations are exchangeable at the group level, that is, if
xj = (xj1, xj2, . . .) denote all observations in group j, then x1,x2, . . . are exchangeable. Assuming each observation is drawn independently from a mixture model, there is a mixture component associated with each observation. Let ji denote a parameter specifying the mixture component associated with the observation xji. We will refer to the variables ji as factors. Note that these variables are not generally distinct; we will develop a different notation for the distinct values of factors. Let F(ji) denote the distribution of xji given the factor ji. Let Gj denote a prior distribution for the factors j = (j1, j2, . . .) associated with group j. We assume that the factors are conditionally independent given Gj . Thus we have the following probability model:
#3 DIRICHLET PROCESSES
In this section, we provide a brief overview of Dirichlet processes. After a discussion of basic definitions, we present three different perspectives on the Dirichlet process: one based on the stickbreaking construction, one based on a P´olya urn model, and one based on a limit of finite mixture models. Each of these perspectives has an analog in the hierarchical Dirichlet process, which is described in Section 4.
Let (,B) be a measurable space, with G0 a probability measure on the space. Let 0 be a positive real number. A Dirichlet process DP(0,G0) is defined to be the distribution of a random probability measure G over (,B) such that, for any finite measurable partition (A1,A2, . . . ,Ar) of , the random vector (G(A1), . . . ,G(Ar)) is distributed as a finite-dimensional Dirichlet distribution with parameters (0G0(A1), . . . , 0G0(Ar)): (G(A1), . . . ,G(Ar))  Dir(0G0(A1), . . . , 0G0(Ar)) . (4)
We write G  DP(0,G0) if G is a random probability measure with distribution given by the Dirichlet process. The existence of the Dirichlet process was established by Ferguson (1973).
#3.1 The stick-breaking construction
Measures drawn from a Dirichlet process are discrete with probability one (Ferguson 1973). This property is made explicit in the stick-breaking construction due to Sethuraman (1994). The stickbreaking construction is based on independent sequences of i.i.d. random variables (0k
 where  is a probability measure concentrated at . Sethuraman (1994) showed that G as defined in this way is a random probability measure distributed according to DP(0,G0). It is important to note that the sequence  = (k)1k =1 constructed by (5) and (6) satisfies
k=1 k = 1 with probability one. Thus we may interpret  as a random probability measure on the positive integers. For convenience, we shall write   GEM(0) if  is a random probability measure defined by (5) and (6) (GEM stands for Griffiths, Engen and McCloskey; e.g. see Pitman 2002b).
#3.2 The Chinese restaurant process
A second perspective on the Dirichlet process is provided by the P´olya urn scheme (Blackwell and MacQueen 1973). The P´olya urn scheme shows that draws from the Dirichlet process are both discrete and exhibit a clustering property.
The P´olya urn scheme does not refer to G directly; it refers to draws from G. Thus, let 1, 2, . . . be a sequence of i.i.d. random variables distributed according to G. That is, the variables 1, 2, . . . are conditionally independent given G, and hence exchangeable. Let us consider the successive conditional distributions of i given 1, . . . , i−1, where G has been integrated out. Blackwell and MacQueen (1973) showed that these conditional distributions have the following form:
We can interpret the conditional distributions in terms of a simple urn model in which a ball of a distinct color is associated with each atom. The balls are drawn equiprobably; when a ball is drawn it is placed back in the urn together with another ball of the same color. In addition, with probability proportional to 0 a new atom is created by drawing from G0 and a ball of a new color is added to the urn.
Expression (7) shows that i has positive probability of being equal to one of the previous draws. Moreover, there is a positive reinforcement effect; the more often a point is drawn, the more likely it is to be drawn in the future. To make the clustering property explicit, it is helpful to introduce a new set of variables that represent distinct values of the atoms. Define 1, . . . , K to be the distinct values taken on by 1, . . . , i−1, and let mk be the number of values i0 that are equal to k for
Using a somewhat different metaphor, the P´olya urn scheme is closely related to a distribution on partitions known as the Chinese restaurant process (Aldous 1985). This metaphor has turned out to be useful in considering various generalizations of the Dirichlet process (Pitman 2002a), and it will be useful in this paper. The metaphor is as follows. Consider a Chinese restaurant with an unbounded number of tables. Each i corresponds to a customer who enters the restaurant, while the distinct values k correspond to the tables at which the customers sit. The ith customer sits at the table indexed by k, with probability proportional to the number of customers mk already seated there (in which case we set i = k), and sits at a new table with probability proportional to 0 (increment K, draw K  G0 and set i = K).
#3.3 Dirichlet process mixture models
One of the most important applications of the Dirichlet process is as a nonparametric prior on the parameters of a mixture model. In particular, suppose that observations xi arise as follows: where F(i) denotes the distribution of the observation xi given i. The factors i are conditionally independent given G, and the observation xi is conditionally independent of the other observations given the factor i. When G is distributed according to a Dirichlet process, this model is referred to as a Dirichlet process mixture model. A graphical model representation of a Dirichlet process mixture model is shown in Figure 1 (Left).
Since G can be represented using a stick-breaking construction (6), the factors i take on values k with probability k. We may denote this using an indicator variable zi which takes on positive integral values and is distributed according to  (interpreting  as a random probability measure on the positive integers). Hence an equivalent representation of a Dirichlet process mixture is given by the following conditional distributions:
#3.4 The infinite limit of finite mixture models
A Dirichlet process mixture model can be derived as the limit of a sequence of finite mixture models, where the number of mixture components is taken to infinity (Neal 1992; Rasmussen 2000; Green and Richardson 2001; Ishwaran and Zarepour 2002). This limiting process provides a third perspective on the Dirichlet process.
Suppose we have L mixture components. Let  = (1, . . . L) denote the mixing proportions. Note that we previously used the symbol  to denote the weights associated with the atoms in G. We have deliberately overloaded the definition of  here; as we shall see later, they are closely related. In fact, in the limit L ! 1 these vectors are equivalent up to a random size-biased permutation of their entries (Pitman 1996).
We place a Dirichlet prior on  with symmetric parameters (0/L, . . . , 0/L). Let k denote the parameter vector associated with mixture component k, and let k have prior distribution G0. Drawing an observation xi from the mixture model involves picking a specific mixture component with probability given by the mixing proportions; let zi denote that component. We thus have the following model:
A consequence of this is that the marginal distribution induced on the observations x1, . . . , xn approaches that of a Dirichlet process mixture model.
#4 HIERARCHICAL DIRICHLET PROCESSES
We propose a nonparametric Bayesian approach to the modeling of grouped data, where each group is associated with a mixture model, and where we wish to link these mixture models. By analogy with Dirichlet process mixture models, we first define the appropriate nonparametric prior, which we refer to as the hierarchical Dirichlet process. We then show how this prior can be used in the grouped mixture model setting. We present analogs of the three perspectives presented earlier for the Dirichlet process—a stick-breaking construction, a Chinese restaurant process representation, and a representation in terms of a limit of finite mixture models.
A hierarchical Dirichlet process is a distribution over a set of random probability measures over (,B). The process defines a set of random probability measures Gj , one for each group, and a global random probability measure G0. The global measure G0 is distributed as a Dirichlet process with concentration parameter and base probability measure H: and the random measures Gj are conditionally independent given G0, with distributions given by a Dirichlet process with base probability measure G0:
The hyperparameters of the hierarchical Dirichlet process consist of the baseline probability measure H, and the concentration parameters   and 0. The baseline H provides the prior distribution for the factors ji. The distribution G0 varies around the prior H, with the amount of variability governed by  . The actual distribution Gj over the factors in the jth group deviates from G0, with the amount of variability governed by 0. If we expect the variability in different groups to be different, we can use a separate concentration parameter j for each group j. In this paper, following Escobar and West (1995), we put vague gamma priors on  A hierarchical Dirichlet process can be used as the prior distribution over the factors for grouped data. For each j let j1, j2, . . . be i.i.d. random variables distributed as Gj . Each ji is a factor corresponding to a single observation xji. The likelihood is given by:
This completes the definition of a hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture model. The corresponding graphical model is shown in Figure 1 (Right).
The hierarchical Dirichlet process can readily be extended to more than two levels. That is, the base measure H can itself be a draw from a DP, and the hierarchy can be extended for as many levels as are deemed useful. In general, we obtain a tree in which a DP is associated with each node, in which the children of a given node are conditionally independent given their parent, and in which the draw from the DP at a given node serves as a base measure for its children. The atoms in the stick-breaking representation at a given node are thus shared among all descendant nodes, providing a notion of shared clusters at multiple levels of resolution.
#4.1 The stick-breaking construction
Given that the global measure G0 is distributed as a Dirichlet process, it can be expressed using a stick-breaking representation:
Let (A1, . . . ,Ar) be a measurable partition of  and let Kl = {k : k 2 Al} for l = 1, . . . , r. Note that (K1, . . . ,Kr) is a finite partition of the positive integers. Further, assuming that H is non-atomic, the k’s are distinct with probability one, so any partition of the positive integers corresponds to some partition of . Thus, for each j we have: for every finite partition of the positive integers. Hence each j is independently distributed according to DP(0,), where we interpret  and j as probability measures on the positive integers. If H is non-atomic then a weaker result still holds: if j  DP(0,) then Gj as given in (17) is still DP(0,G0) distributed.
As in the Dirichlet process mixture model, since each factor ji is distributed according to Gj , it takes on the value k with probability jk. Again let zji be an indicator variable such that ji = zji . Given zji we have xji  F(zji ). Thus we obtain an equivalent representation of the hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture via the following conditional distributions:
Together with (20), (16) and (17), this completes the description of the stick-breaking construction for hierarchical Dirichlet processes.
#4.2 The Chinese restaurant franchise
In this section we describe an analog of the Chinese restaurant process for hierarchical Dirichlet processes that we refer to as the Chinese restaurant franchise. In the Chinese restaurant franchise, the metaphor of the Chinese restaurant process is extended to allow multiple restaurants which share a set of dishes.
The metaphor is as follows (see Figure 2). We have a restaurant franchise with a shared menu across the restaurants. At each table of each restaurant one dish is ordered from the menu by the first customer who sits there, and it is shared among all customers who sit at that table. Multiple tables in multiple restaurants can serve the same dish.
In this setup, the restaurants correspond to groups and the customers correspond to the factors ji. We also let 1, . . . , K denote K i.i.d. random variables distributed according to H; this is the global menu of dishes. We also introduce variables  jt which represent the table-specific choice of dishes; in particular,  jt is the dish served at table t in restaurant j.
Note that each ji is associated with one  jt, while each  jt is associated with one k. We introduce indicators to denote these associations. In particular, let tji be the index of the  jt associated with ji, and let kjt be the index of k associated with  jt. In the Chinese restaurant franchise metaphor, customer i in restaurant j sat at table tji while table t in restaurant j serves dish kjt.
We also need a notation for counts. In particular, we need to maintain counts of customers and counts of tables. We use the notation njtk to denote the number of customers in restaurant j at table t eating dish k. Marginal counts are represented with dots. Thus, njt· represents the number of customers in restaurant j at table t and nj·k represents the number of customers in restaurant j eating dish k. The notation mjk denotes the number of tables in restaurant j serving dish k. Thus, mj· represents the number of tables in restaurant j, m·k represents the number of tables serving dish k, and m·· the total number of tables occupied.
Let us now compute marginals under a hierarchical Dirichlet process when G0 and Gj are integrated out. First consider the conditional distribution for ji given j1, . . . , j,i−1 and G0, where
This is a mixture, and a draw from this mixture can be obtained by drawing from the terms on the right-hand side with probabilities given by the corresponding mixing proportions. If a term in the first summation is chosen then we set ji =  jt and let tji = t for the chosen t. If the second term is chosen then we increment mj· by one, draw  jmj·  G0 and set ji =  jmj· and tji = mj·.
Now we proceed to integrate out G0. Notice that G0 appears only in its role as the distribution of the variables  jt. Since G0 is distributed according to a Dirichlet process, we can integrate it out by using (8) again and write the conditional distribution of  jt as:
If we draw  jt via choosing a term in the summation on the right-hand side of this equation, we set  jt = k and let kjt = k for the chosen k. If the second term is chosen then we increment K by one, draw K  H and set  jt = K and kjt = K.
This completes the description of the conditional distributions of the ji variables. To use these equations to obtain samples of ji, we proceed as follows. For each j and i, first sample ji using (24). If a new sample from G0 is needed, we use (25) to obtain a new sample  jt and set ji =  jt. Note that in the hierarchical Dirichlet process the values of the factors are shared between the groups, as well as within the groups. This is a key property of hierarchical Dirichlet processes.
#4.3 The infinite limit of finite mixture models
As in the case of a Dirichlet process mixture model, the hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture model can be derived as the infinite limit of finite mixtures. In this section, we present two apparently different finite models that both yield the hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture in the infinite limit, each emphasizing a different aspect of the model.
Consider the following collection of finite mixture models, where  is a global vector of mixing proportions and j is a group-specific vector of mixing proportions:
It is now clear that as L ! 1 the marginal distribution this finite model induces on x approaches the hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture model.
There is an alternative finite model whose limit is also the hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture model. Instead of introducing dependencies between the groups by placing a prior on  (as in the first finite model), each group can instead choose a subset of T mixture components from a modelwide set of L mixture components. In particular consider the following model:
As T ! 1 and L ! 1, the limit of this model is the Chinese restaurant franchise process; hence the infinite limit of this model is also the hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture model.
#5 INFERENCE
In this section we describe three related Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling schemes for the hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture model. The first is a straightforward Gibbs sampler based on the Chinese restaurant franchise, the second is based upon an augmented representation involving both the Chinese restaurant franchise and the posterior for G0, while the third is a variation on the second sampling scheme with streamlined bookkeeping. To simplify the discussion we assume that the base distribution H is conjugate to the data distribution F; this allows us to focus on the issues specific to the hierarchical Dirichlet process. The nonconjugate case can be approached by adapting to the hierarchical Dirichlet process techniques developed for nonconjugate DP mixtures (Neal 2000). Moreover, in this section we assume fixed values for the concentration parameters 0 and  ;we present a sampler for these parameters in the appendix.
We recall the random variables of interest. The variables xji are the observed data. Each xji is assumed to arise as a draw from a distribution F(ji). Let the factor ji be associated with the table tji in the restaurant representation; i.e., let ji =  jtji . The random variable  jt is an instance of mixture component kjt; i.e.,  jt = kjt . The prior over the parameters k is H. Let zji = kjtji denote the mixture component associated with the observation xji. We use the notation njtk to denote the number of customers in restaurant j at table t eating dish k, while mjk denotes the number of tables in restaurant j serving dish k. Marginal counts are represented with dots. Let x = (xji : all j, i), xjt = (xji : all i with tji = t), t = (tji : all j, i), k = (kjt : all j, t), z = (zji : all j, i), m = (mjk : all j, k) and  = (1, . . . , K). When a superscript is attached to a set of variables or a count, e.g., x−ji, k−jt or n−ji jt· , this means that the variable corresponding to the superscripted index is removed from the set or from the calculation of the count. In the examples, x−ji = x\xji, k−jt = k\kjt and n−ji jt· is the number of observations in group j whose factor is associated with  jt, leaving out item xji.
Let F() have density f(·|) and H have density h(·). Since H is conjugate to F we integrate out the mixture component parameters  in the sampling schemes. Denote the conditional density of xji under mixture component k given all data items except xji as Similarly denote f−xjt k (xjt) as the conditional density of xjt given all data items associated with mixture component k leaving out xjt. Finally, we will suppress references to all variables except those being sampled in the conditional distributions to follow, in particular we omit references to x, 0 and 
#5.1 Posterior sampling in the Chinese restaurant franchise
The Chinese restaurant franchise presented in Section 4.2 can be used to produce samples from the prior distribution over the ji, as well as intermediary information related to the tables and mixture components. This framework can be adapted to yield a Gibbs sampling scheme for posterior sampling given observations x.
Rather than dealing with the ji’s and  jt’s directly, we shall sample their index variables tji and kjt instead. The ji’s and  jt’s can be reconstructed from these index variables and the k’s. This representation makes the Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling scheme more efficient (cf. Neal 2000). Notice that the tji and the kjt inherit the exchangeability properties of the ji and the  jt— the conditional distributions in (24) and (25) can be adapted to be expressed in terms of tji and kjt.
The state space consists of values of t and k. Notice that the number of kjt variables represented explicitly by the algorithm is not fixed. We can think of the actual state space as consisting of an infinite number of kjt’s; only finitely many are actually associated to data and represented explicitly. Sampling t. To compute the conditional distribution of tji given the remainder of the variables, we make use of exchangeability and treat tji as the last variable being sampled in the last group in (24) and (25). We obtain the conditional posterior for tji by combining the conditional prior distribution for tji with the likelihood of generating xji.
Using (24), the prior probability that tji takes on a particular previously used value t is proportional to n−ji jt· , whereas the probability that it takes on a new value (say tnew = mj· + 1) is proportional to 0. The likelihood due to xji given tji = t for some previously used t is f −xji k (xji). The likelihood for tji = tnew can be calculated by integrating out the possible values of kjtnew using (25):
If as a result of updating tji some table t becomes unoccupied, i.e., njt· = 0, then the probability that this table will be reoccupied in the future will be zero, since this is always proportional to njt·. As a result, we may delete the corresponding kjt from the data structure. If as a result of deleting kjt some mixture component k becomes unallocated, we delete this mixture component as well. Sampling k. Since changing kjt actually changes the component membership of all data items in table t, the likelihood obtained by setting kjt = k is given by f−xjt k (xjt), so that the conditional probability of kjt is
#5.2 Posterior sampling with an augmented representation
In the Chinese restaurant franchise sampling scheme, the sampling for all groups is coupled since G0 is integrated out. This complicates matters in more elaborate models (e.g., in the case of the hidden Markov model considered in Section 7). In this section we describe an alternative sampling scheme where in addition to the Chinese restaurant franchise representation, G0 is instantiated and sampled from so that the posterior conditioned on G0 factorizes across groups.
Given a posterior sample (t, k) from the Chinese restaurant franchise representation, we can obtain a draw from the posterior of G0 by noting that G0  DP(
Given a sample of G0 the posterior for each group is factorized and sampling in each group can be performed separately. The variables of interest in this scheme are t and k as in the Chinese restaurant franchise sampling scheme and  above, while both  and Gu are integrated out (this introduces couplings into the sampling for each group but is easily handled).
Sampling for t and k is almost identical to the Chinese restaurant franchise sampling scheme. The only novelty is that we replace m·k by k and   by u in (31), (32), (33) and (34), and when a new component knew is instantiated we draw b  Beta(1,  ) and set knew = bu and new u = (1− b)u. We can understand b as follows: when a new component is instantiated, it is instantiated from Gu by choosing an atom in Gu with probability given by its weight b. Using the fact that the sequence of stick-breaking weights is a size-biased permutation of the weights in a draw from a Dirichlet process (Pitman 1996), the weight b corresponding to the chosen atom in Gu will have the same distribution as the first stick-breaking weight, i.e., Beta(1,  ). Sampling for  has already been described in (35): (1, . . . , K, u) | t, k  Dir(m·1, . . . ,m·K,  ) . (36)
#5.3 Posterior sampling by direct assignment
In both the Chinese restaurant franchise and augmented representation sampling schemes, data items are first assigned to some table tji, and the tables are then assigned to some mixture component kjt. This indirect association to mixture components can make the bookkeeping somewhat involved. In this section we describe a variation on the augmented representation sampling scheme that directly assigns data items to mixture components via a variable zji which is equivalent to kjtji in the earlier sampling schemes. The tables are only represented in terms of the numbers of tables mjk. Sampling z can be realized by grouping together terms associated with each k in (31) and (32): Samplingm. In the augmented representation sampling scheme, conditioned on the assignment of data items to mixture components z, the only effect of t and k on other variables is via m in the conditional distribution of  in (36). As a result it is sufficient to sample m in place of t and k. To obtain the distribution of mjk conditioned on other variables, consider the distribution of tji assuming that kjtji = zji. The probability that data item xji is assigned to some table t such that kjt = k is p(tji = t|kjt = k, t−ji, k,) / n−ji jt· , (38) while the probability that it is assigned a new table under component k is p(tji = tnew|kjtnew = k, t−ji, k,) / 0k . (39)
These equations form the conditional distributions of a Gibbs sampler whose equilibrium distribution is the prior distribution over the assignment of nj·k observations to components in an ordinary Dirichlet process with concentration parameter 0k. The corresponding distribution over the number of components is then the desired conditional distribution of mjk. Antoniak (1974) has shown that this is: where s(n,m) are unsigned Stirling numbers of the first kind. We have by definition that s(0, 0) = s(1, 1) = 1, s(n, 0) = 0 for n > 0 and s(n,m) = 0 for m > n. Other entries can be computed as s(n + 1,m) = s(n,m − 1) + ns(n,m).
Sampling for  is the same as in the augmented sampling scheme and is given by (36).
#5.4 Comparison of Sampling Schemes
Let us now consider the relative merits of these three sampling schemes. In terms of ease of implementation, the direct assignment scheme is preferred because its bookkeeping is straightforward. The two schemes based on the Chinese restaurant franchise involve more substantial effort. In addition, both the augmented and direct assignment schemes sample rather than integrate out G0, and as a result the sampling of the groups is decoupled given G0. This simplifies the sampling schemes and makes them applicable in elaborate models such as the hidden Markov model in Section 7.
In terms of convergence speed, the direct assignment scheme changes the component membership of data items one at a time, while in both schemes using the Chinese restaurant franchise changing the component membership of one table will change the membership of multiple data items at the same time, leading to potentially improved performance. This is akin to split-and-merge techniques in Dirichlet process mixture modeling (Jain and Neal 2000). This analogy is, however, somewhat misleading in that unlike split-and-merge methods, the assignment of data items to tables is a consequence of the prior clustering effect of a Dirichlet process with nj·k samples. As a result, we expect that the probability of obtaining a successful reassignment of a table to another previously used component will often be small, and we do not necessarily expect the Chinese restaurant franchise schemes to dominate the direct assignment scheme.
The inference methods presented here should be viewed as first steps in the development of inference procedures for hierarchical Dirichlet process mixtures. More sophisticated methods— such as split-and-merge methods (Jain and Neal 2000) and variational methods (Blei and Jordan 2005)—have shown promise for Dirichlet processes and we expect that they will prove useful for hierarchical Dirichlet processes as well.
#6 EXPERIMENTS
We describe two experiments in this section to highlight the two aspects of the hierarchical Dirichlet process: its nonparametric nature and its hierarchical nature. In the next section we present a third experiment highlighting the ease with which we can extend the framework to more complex models, specifically a hidden Markov model with a countably infinite state space.
The software that we used for these experiments is available at http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/hdp. The software implements a hierarchy of Dirichlet processes of arbitrary depth.
#6.1 Document modeling
Recall the problem of document modeling discussed in Section 1. Following standard methodology in the information retrieval literature (Salton and McGill 1983), we view a document as a “bag of words”; that is, we make an exchangeability assumption for the words in the document. Moreover, we model the words in a document as arising from a mixture model, in which a mixture component—a “topic”—is a multinomial distribution over words from some finite and known vocabulary. The goal is to model a corpus of documents in such a way as to allow the topics to be shared among the documents in a corpus.
A parametric approach to this problem is provided by the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) model of Blei et al. (2003). This model involves a finite mixture model in which the mixing propor- tions are drawn on a document-specific basis from a Dirichlet distribution. Moreover, given these mixing proportions, each word in the document is an independent draw from the mixture model. That is, to generate a word, a mixture component (i.e., a topic) is selected, and then a word is generated from that topic.
Note that the assumption that each word is associated with a possibly different topic differs from a model in which a mixture component is selected once per document, and then words are generated i.i.d. from the selected topic. Moreover, it is interesting to note that the same distinction arises in population genetics, where multiple words in a document are analogous to multiple markers along a chromosome. Indeed, Pritchard et al. (2000) have developed a model in which marker probabilities are selected once per marker; their model is essentially identical to LDA.
As in simpler finite mixture models, it is natural to try to extend LDA and related models by using Dirichlet processes to capture uncertainty regarding the number of mixture components. This is somewhat more difficult than in the case of a simple mixture model, however, because in the LDA model the documents have document-specific mixing proportions. We thus require multiple DPs, one for each document. This then poses the problem of sharing mixture components across multiple DPs, precisely the problem that the hierarchical DP is designed to solve.
The hierarchical DP extension of LDA thus takes the following form. Given an underlying measure H on multinomial probability vectors, we select a random measure G0 which provides a countably infinite collection of multinomial probability vectors; these can be viewed as the set of all topics that can be used in a given corpus. For the jth document in the corpus we sample Gj using G0 as a base measure; this selects specific subsets of topics to be used in document j. From Gj we then generate a document by repeatedly sampling specific multinomial probability vectors ji from Gj and sampling words xji with probabilities ji. The overlap among the random measures Gj implements the sharing of topics among documents.
We fit both the standard parametric LDA model and its hierarchical DP extension to a corpus of nematode biology abstracts (see http://elegans.swmed.edu/wli/cgcbib). There are 5838 abstracts in total. After removing standard stop words and words appearing fewer than 10 times, we are left with 476441 words in total. Following standard information retrieval methodology, the vocabulary is defined as the set of distinct words left in all abstracts; this has size 5699.
Both models were as similar as possible beyond the distinction that LDA assumes a fixed finite number of topics while the hierarchical Dirichlet process does not. Both models used a symmetric
Dirichlet distribution with parameters of 0.5 for the prior H over topic distributions. The concentration parameters were given vague gamma priors,    Gamma(1, .1) and 0  Gamma(1, 1). The distribution over topics in LDA is assumed to be symmetric Dirichlet with parameters 0/L with L being the number of topics; is not used in LDA. Posterior samples were obtained using the Chinese restaurant franchise sampling scheme, while the concentration parameters were sampled using the auxiliary variable sampling scheme presented in the appendix.
We evaluated the models via 10-fold cross-validation. The evaluation metric was the perplexity, a standard metric in the information retrieval literature. The perplexity of a held-out abstract consisting of words w1, . . . ,wI is defined to be: where p(·) is the probability mass function for a given model.
The results are shown in Figure 3. For LDA we evaluated the perplexity for mixture component cardinalities ranging between 10 and 120. As seen in Figure 3 (Left), the hierarchical DP mixture approach—which integrates over the mixture component cardinalities—performs as well as the best LDA model, doing so without any form of model selection procedure. Moreover, as shown in Figure 3 (Right), the posterior over the number of topics obtained under the hierarchical DP mixture model is consistent with this range of the best-fitting LDA models.
#6.2 Multiple corpora
We now consider the problem of sharing clusters among the documents in multiple corpora. We approach this problem by extending the hierarchical Dirichlet process to a third level. A draw from a top-level DP yields the base measure for each of a set of corpus-level DPs. Draws from each of these corpus-level DPs yield the base measures for DPs associated with the documents within a corpus. Finally, draws from the document-level DPs provide a representation of each document as a probability distribution across topics (which are distributions across words). The model allows topics to be shared both within each corpus and between corpora.
The documents that we used for these experiments consist of articles from the proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) conference for the years 1988-1999. The original articles are available at http://books.nips.cc; we use a preprocessed version available at http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/roweis/nips. The NIPS conference deals with a range of topics covering both human and machine intelligence. Articles are separated into nine sections: algorithms and architectures (AA), applications (AP), cognitive science (CS), control and navigation (CN), implementations (IM), learning theory (LT), neuroscience (NS), signal processing (SP), vision sciences (VS). (These are the sections used in the years 1995-1999. The sectioning in earlier years differed slightly; we manually relabeled sections from the earlier years to match those used in 1995-1999.) We treat these sections as “corpora,” and are interested in the pattern of sharing of topics among these corpora.
There were 1447 articles in total. Each article was modeled as a bag-of-words. We culled standard stop words as well as words occurring more than 4000 or fewer than 50 times in the whole corpus. This left us with on average slightly more than 1000 words per article. We considered the following experimental setup. Given a set of articles from a single NIPS section that we wish to model (the VS section in the experiments that we report below), we wish to know whether it is of value (in terms of prediction performance) to include articles from other NIPS sections. This can be done in one of two ways: we can lump all of the articles together without regard for the division into sections, or we can use the hierarchical DP approach to link the sections. Thus we consider three models (see Figure 4 for graphical representations of these models): • M1: This model ignores articles from the other sections and simply uses a hierarchical DP mixture of the kind presented in Section 6.1 to model the VS articles. This model serves as a baseline. We used  for the concentration parameters. • M2: This model incorporates articles from other sections, but ignores the distinction into sections, using a single hierarchical DP mixture model to model all of the articles. Priors of Gamma(5, 0.1) and 0  Gamma(0.1, 0.1) were used. • M3: This model takes a full hierarchical approach and models the NIPS sections as multiple corpora, linked via the hierarchical DP mixture formalism. The model is a tree, in which the root is a draw from a single DP for all articles, the first level is a set of draws from DPs for the NIPS sections, and the second level is set of draws from DPs for the articles within sections. Priors of Gamma(5, 0.1), 0  Gamma(5, 0.1), and 1  Gamma(0.1, 0.1) were used.
In all models a finite and known vocabulary is assumed and the base measure H used is a symmetric Dirichlet distribution with parameters of 0.5.
We conducted experiments in which a set of 80 articles were chosen uniformly at random from one of the sections other than VS (this was done to balance the impact of different sections, which are of different sizes). A training set of 80 articles were also chosen uniformly at random from the VS section, as were an additional set of 47 test articles distinct from the training articles. Results report predictive performance on VS test articles based on a training set consisting of the 80 articles in the additional section and N VS training articles where N varies between 0 and 80. The direct assignment sampling scheme is used, while concentration parameters are sampled using the auxiliary variable sampling scheme in the appendix.
Figure 5 (Left) presents the average predictive performance for all three models over 5 runs as the number N of VS training articles ranged from 0 to 80. The performance is measured in terms of the perplexity of single words in the test articles given the training articles, averaged over the choice of which additional section was used. As seen in the figure, the fully hierarchical model M3 performs best, with perplexity decreasing rapidly with modest values of N. For small values of N, the performance ofM1 is quite poor, but the performance approaches that of M3 when more than 20 articles are included in the VS training set. The performance of the partially-hierarchical M2 was poorer than the fully-hierarchical M3 throughout the range of N. M2 dominated M1 for small N, but yielded poorer performance than M1 for N greater than 14. Our interpretation is that the sharing of strength based on other articles is useful when little other information is available (small N), but that eventually (medium to large N) there is crosstalk between the sections and it is preferable to model them separately and share strength via the hierarchy.
While the results in Figure 5 (Left) are an average over the sections, it is also of interest to see which sections are the most beneficial in terms of enhancing the prediction of the articles in VS. Figure 5 (Right) plots the predictive performance for model M3 when given data from each of three particular sections: LT, AA and AP. While articles in the LT section are concerned mostly with theoretical properties of learning algorithms, those in AA are mostly concerned with models and methodology, and those in AP are mostly concerned with applications of learning algorithms to various problems. As seen in the figure, we see that predictive performance is enhanced the most by prior exposure to articles from AP, less by articles from AA, and still less by articles from LT. Given that articles in VS tend to be concerned with the practical application of learning algorithms to problems in computer vision, this pattern of transfer seems reasonable.
Finally, it is of interest to investigate the subject matter content of the topics discovered by the hierarchical DP model. We did so in the following experimental setup. For a given section other than VS (e.g., AA), we fit a model based on articles from that section. We then introduced articles from the VS section and continued to fit the model, while holding the topics found from the earlier fit fixed, and recording which topics from the earlier section were allocated to words in the VS section. Table 1 displays representations of the two most frequently occurring topics in this setup (a topic is represented by the set of words which have highest probability under that topic). These topics provide qualitative confirmation of our expectations regarding the overlap between VS and other sections.
#7 HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS
The simplicity of the hierarchical DP specification—the base measure for a DP is distributed as a DP—makes it straightforward to exploit the hierarchical DP as a building block in more complex models. In this section we demonstrate this in the case of the hidden Markov model.
Recall that a hidden Markov model (HMM) is a doubly stochastic Markov chain in which a sequence of multinomial “state” variables (v1, v2, . . . , vT ) are linked via a state transition matrix, and each element yt in a sequence of “observations” (y1, y2, . . . , yT ) is drawn independently of the other observations conditional on vt (Rabiner 1989). This is essentially a dynamic variant of a finite mixture model, in which there is one mixture component corresponding to each value of the multinomial state. As with classical finite mixtures, it is interesting to consider replacing the finite mixture underlying the HMM with a Dirichlet process.
Note that the HMM involves not a single mixture model, but rather a set of mixture models— one for each value of the current state. That is, the “current state” vt indexes a specific row of the transition matrix, with the probabilities in this row serving as the mixing proportions for the choice of the “next state” vt+1. Given the next state vt+1, the observation yt+1 is drawn from the mixture component indexed by vt+1. Thus, to consider a nonparametric variant of the HMM which allows an unbounded set of states, we must consider a set of DPs, one for each value of the current state. Moreover, these DPs must be linked, because we want the same set of “next states” to be reachable from each of the “current states.” This amounts to the requirement that the atoms associated with the state-conditional DPs should be shared—exactly the framework of the hierarchical DP.
Thus, we can define a nonparametric hidden Markov model by simply replacing the set of conditional finite mixture models underlying the classical HMM with a hierarchical Dirichlet process mixture model. We refer to the resulting model as a hierarchical Dirichlet process hidden Markov model (HDP-HMM). The HDP-HMMprovides an alternative to methods that place an explicit parametric prior on the number of states or make use of model selection methods to select a fixed number of states (Stolcke and Omohundro 1993).
In work that served as an inspiration for the HDP-HMM, Beal et al. (2002) discussed a model known as the infinite hidden Markov model, in which the number of hidden states of a hidden Markov model is allowed to be countably infinite. Indeed, Beal et al. (2002) defined a notion of “hierarchical Dirichlet process” for this model, but their “hierarchical Dirichlet process” is not hierarchical in the Bayesian sense—involving a distribution on the parameters of a Dirichlet process— but is instead a description of a coupled set of urn models. We briefly review this construction, and relate it to our formulation.
Beal et al. (2002) considered the following two-level procedure for determining the transition probabilities of a Markov chain with an unbounded number of states. At the first level, the probability of transitioning from a state u to a state v is proportional to the number of times the same transition is observed at other time steps, while with probability proportional to 0 an “oracle” process is invoked. At this second level, the probability of transitioning to state v is proportional to the number of times state v has been chosen by the oracle (regardless of the previous state), while the probability of transitioning to a novel state is proportional to  . The intended role of the oracle is to tie together the transition models so that they have destination states in common, in much the same way that the baseline distribution G0 ties together the group-specific mixture components in the hierarchical Dirichlet process.
To relate this two-level urn model to the hierarchical DP framework, let us describe a representation of the HDP-HMMusing the stick-breaking formalism. In particular, consider the hierarchical Dirichlet process representation shown in Figure 6. The parameters in this representation have the following distributions: where we assume for simplicity that there is a distinguished initial state v0. If we now consider the Chinese restaurant franchise representation of this model as discussed in Section 5, it turns out that the result is equivalent to the coupled urn model of Beal et al. (2002), hence the infinite hidden Markov model is an HDP-HMM.
Unfortunately, posterior inference using the Chinese restaurant franchise representation is awkward for this model, involving substantial bookkeeping. Indeed, Beal et al. (2002) did not present an MCMC inference algorithm for the infinite hidden Markov model, proposing instead a heuristic approximation to Gibbs sampling. On the other hand, both the augmented representation and direct assignment representations lead directly to MCMC sampling schemes that are straightforward to implement. In the experiments reported in the following section we used the direct assignment representation.
Practical applications of hidden Markov models often consider sets of sequences, and treat these sequences as exchangeable at the level of sequences. Thus, in applications to speech recognition, a hidden Markov model for a given word in the vocabulary is generally trained via replicates of that word being spoken. This setup is readily accommodated within the hierarchical DP framework by simply considering an additional level of the Bayesian hierarchy, letting a master Dirichlet process couple each of the HDP-HMMs, each of which is a set of Dirichlet processes.
#7.1 Alice inWonderland
In this section we report experimental results for the problem of predicting strings of letters in sentences taken from Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, comparing the HDP-HMM to other HMM-related approaches.
Each sentence is treated as a sequence of letters and spaces (rather than as a sequence of words). There are 27 distinct symbols (26 letters and space); cases and punctuation marks are ignored. There are 20 training sentences with average length of 51 symbols, and there are 40 test sentences with an average length of 100. The base distribution H is a symmetric Dirichlet distribution over 27 symbols with parameters 0.1. The concentration parameters   and 0 are given Gamma(1, 1) priors.
Using the direct assignment sampling method for posterior predictive inference, we compared the HDD-HMM to a variety of other methods for prediction using hidden Markov models: (1) a classical HMM using maximum likelihood (ML) parameters obtained via the Baum-Welch algorithm (Rabiner 1989), (2) a classical HMM using maximum a posteriori (MAP) parameters, taking the priors to be independent, symmetric Dirichlet distributions for both the transition and emission probabilities, and (3) a classical HMMtrained using an approximation to a full Bayesian analysis— in particular, a variational Bayesian (VB) method due to MacKay (1997) and described in detail in Beal (2003). For each of these classical HMMs, we conducted experiments for each value of the state cardinality ranging from 1 to 60.
We present the perplexity on test sentences in Figure 7 (Left). For VB, the predictive probability is intractable to compute, so the modal setting of parameters was used. Both MAP and VB models were given optimal settings of the hyperparameters found using the HDP-HMM. We see that the HDP-HMM has a lower perplexity than all of the models tested for ML, MAP, and VB. Figure 7 (Right) shows posterior samples of the number of states used by the HDP-HMM.
#8 DISCUSSION
We have described a nonparametric approach to the modeling of groups of data, where each group is characterized by a mixture model and we allow mixture components to be shared between groups. We have proposed a hierarchical Bayesian solution to this problem, in which a set of Dirichlet processes are coupled via their base measure, which is itself distributed according to a Dirichlet process.
We have described three different representations that capture aspects of the hierarchical Dirichlet process. In particular, we described a stick-breaking representation that describes the random measures explicitly, a representation of marginals in terms of an urn model that we referred to as the “Chinese restaurant franchise,” and a representation of the process in terms of an infinite limit of finite mixture models.
These representations led to the formulation of three Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling schemes for posterior inference under hierarchical Dirichlet process mixtures. The first scheme is based directly on the Chinese restaurant franchise representation, the second scheme represents the posterior using both a Chinese restaurant franchise and a sample from the global measure, while the third uses a direct assignment of data items to mixture components.
Clustering is an important activity in many large-scale data analysis problems in engineering and science, reflecting the heterogeneity that is often present when data are collected on a large scale. Clustering problems can be approached within a probabilistic framework via finite mixture models (Fraley and Raftery 2002; Green and Richardson 2001), and recent years have seen numerous examples of applications of finite mixtures and their dynamical cousins the HMM in areas such as bioinformatics (Durbin et al. 1998), speech recognition (Huang et al. 2001), information retrieval (Blei et al. 2003) and computational vision (Forsyth and Ponce 2002). These areas also provide numerous instances of data analyses which involve multiple, linked sets of clustering problems, for which classical clustering methods (model-based or non-model-based) provide little in the way of leverage. In bioinformatics we have already alluded to the problem of finding haplotype structure in subpopulations. Other examples in bioinformatics include the use of HMMs for amino acid sequences, where a hierarchical DP version of the HMM would allow motifs to be discovered and shared among different families of proteins. In speech recognition multiple HMMs are already widely used, in the form of word-specific and speaker-specific models, and adhoc methods are generally used to share statistical strength among models. We have discussed examples of grouped data in information retrieval; other examples include problems in which groups are indexed by author or by language. Finally, computational vision and robotics problems often involve sets of descriptors or objects that are arranged in a taxonomy. Examples such as these, in which there is substantial uncertainty regarding appropriate numbers of clusters, and in which the sharing of statistical strength among groups is natural and desirable, suggest that the hierarchical nonparametric Bayesian approach to clustering presented here may provide a generally useful extension of model-based clustering. 